docs/TASKS.md, before:

# Tasks

## Current Task ID Counter: T-016

This counter tracks the highest task ID used so far. When creating a new task, use T-017 as the next available ID.

## Current Priorities
1. [T-015] Fix LLM Player Timeout Issues
2. [T-016] Create Short Demo Game
3. [T-001] Setup Project Structure
4. [T-002] Implement Core Schema System
5. [T-003] Create AI Player Interface
6. [T-014] Create LLM Player Demo Script
7. [T-004] Build Game Launcher

## IMPORTANT: INSTRUCTIONS FOR WORKING WITH THIS DOCUMENT

These instructions must not be summarized or removed from this document.

**Testing Requirements**: For general testing guidelines and approach, refer to [TESTING.md](TESTING.md). Each task requiring testing should include specific test procedures directly in its description.

1. **Task Structure**:
   - Each task has a unique ID (format: T-XXX)
   - Use the Task ID Counter at the top of this document to determine the next available ID
   - Increment the counter each time you create a new task
   - Tasks can have dependencies (list of task IDs)
   - Tasks must have clear acceptance criteria
   - Tasks can be high-level (epics) or low-level (implementation details)

2. **Task States** (standard sequence):
   - TODO: Not started
   - BLOCKED: Cannot proceed due to dependencies
   - IN PROGRESS: Currently being worked on
   - TESTING: Implementation complete, awaiting human verification
   - DONE: Completed and verified (all tests passing and human verified)
   - CANCELLED: Will not be implemented, with reason
   
   **Important State Transition Rules:**
   - A task should ONLY move from TESTING to DONE when ALL tests pass
   - If any tests fail during the TESTING phase, the task MUST be moved back to IN PROGRESS state
   - Human verification is required for all state transitions from TESTING to DONE
   - When "manual testing" is mentioned, it ALWAYS means asking the human user to test the functionality - AI cannot perform manual testing itself

3. **Task Maintenance**:
   - When a task is marked as DONE and has been verified, it should LATER be moved to TASK_ARCHIVE.md
   - Use the archive script to move completed tasks: `./scripts/archive_task.sh T-XXX`
   - NEVER use the Edit tool directly on the TASK_ARCHIVE.md file
   - The archive script will automatically extract, append, and remove the task
   - Links in tasks may refer to archived tasks - use GrepTool to find them in TASK_ARCHIVE.md
   - Break down high-level tasks into low-level tasks as work progresses
   - Do not remove these instructions
   - Reflect on different tasks and make sure that this document doesn't have self-contradictions

4. **Task Format**:
```
### [T-XXX] Short descriptive title [STATE]
**Dependencies**: T-YYY, T-ZZZ (if any)
**Description**: Detailed description of what needs to be done
**Acceptance Criteria**:
- Criterion 1
- Criterion 2
- ...
**Relevant Files**:
- Path to relevant file 1
- Path to relevant file 2
```

5. **Task References**:
   - Each task should include a list of relevant files for implementation
   - This helps with efficient code navigation and understanding
   - Include both existing files that need to be referenced and new files to be created
   - The references should be full file paths where possible
   - When referencing directories, use trailing slash to indicate a directory

6. **Task scope**:
   - High-level tasks (Epics) are larger features or user stories
   - Low-level tasks are specific implementation details or sub-tasks
   - Leaf-level (in terms of trees) tasks should be something that can be implemented in a single session

7. **Critical Rules for Task Management**:
   - ALWAYS use this file (TASKS.md) as the SINGLE SOURCE OF TRUTH for ALL work
   - ALL bugs, issues, features, and work items MUST be tracked here
   - NEVER create separate files like ISSUES.md, BUGS.md, etc.
   - When finding bugs or issues, add them directly here as new tasks
   - Mark critical bugs and urgent fixes with [URGENT] tag
   - If a task is becoming too large or complex, break it down into smaller sub-tasks
   - Each task should be focused on a specific problem or feature
   - Create clear parent-child task relationships using dependencies
   - Completed tasks should eventually be moved to TASK_ARCHIVE.md for organizational clarity

## High-level tasks (epics)

### [T-001] Setup Project Structure [IN PROGRESS]
**Dependencies**: None
**Description**: Set up the basic project structure with all necessary configs based on the architecture document.
**Acceptance Criteria**:
- Directory structure defined and created
- All necessary configs in place
- Build pipeline working
- README updated with setup instructions
**Relevant Files**:
- /Users/maxyankov/Projects/ai-plays-pico8/docs/ARCHITECTURE.md
- /Users/maxyankov/Projects/ai-plays-pico8/tsconfig.json
- /Users/maxyankov/Projects/ai-plays-pico8/package.json
- /Users/maxyankov/Projects/ai-plays-pico8/README.md
- /Users/maxyankov/Projects/ai-plays-pico8/src/

### [T-002] Implement Core Schema System [TODO]
**Dependencies**: T-001
**Description**: Create a schema system using Zod or similar library to define and validate game actions, with ability to generate JSON schema for LLM function calling.
**Acceptance Criteria**:
- Schema system implemented with type safety
- Ability to define complex action schemas
- Conversion to JSON Schema for function calling
- Validation/parsing of responses against schemas
- Basic tests demonstrating functionality
**Relevant Files**:
- /Users/maxyankov/Projects/ai-plays-pico8/src/schema/

### [T-003] Create AI Player Interface [TESTING]
**Dependencies**: T-002
**Description**: Implement the core AI Player class that handles LLM interaction, maintains conversation history, and processes game outputs. Use a generic LLM interface for flexibility.
**Acceptance Criteria**:
- AIPlayer class implementation ✅
- Methods for processing game output ✅
- Conversation history management ✅
- LLM integration with function calling ✅
- Configuration options for different LLMs ✅
- Error handling and retry mechanisms ✅
**Relevant Files**:
- /Users/maxyankov/Projects/ai-plays-pico8/src/ai/llm-player.ts
- /Users/maxyankov/Projects/ai-plays-pico8/src/ai/llm-player.test.ts
- /Users/maxyankov/Projects/ai-plays-pico8/src/ai/index.ts
- /Users/maxyankov/Projects/ai-plays-pico8/src/types/game.ts

### [T-004] Build Game Launcher [TODO]
**Dependencies**: T-003
**Description**: Create the main executable launcher that can run games with AI assistance.
**Acceptance Criteria**:
- Command-line interface for launcher
- Ability to select and launch games
- Configuration options for AI and games
- Game lifecycle management
- Results reporting and logging
**Relevant Files**:
- /Users/maxyankov/Projects/ai-plays-pico8/src/launcher/
- /Users/maxyankov/Projects/ai-plays-pico8/index.ts

### [T-005] Implement Sample Text Adventure [IN PROGRESS]
**Dependencies**: T-004
**Description**: Create a simple text adventure game as a first template to demonstrate the system.
**Acceptance Criteria**:
- Basic text adventure implementation ✅
- Multiple rooms/locations ✅
- Items and inventory system ✅
- Simple puzzles for AI to solve ✅
- Clear win/lose conditions ✅
**Relevant Files**:
- /Users/maxyankov/Projects/ai-plays-pico8/src/games/text-adventure/index.ts
- /Users/maxyankov/Projects/ai-plays-pico8/src/games/text-adventure/types.ts
- /Users/maxyankov/Projects/ai-plays-pico8/src/games/text-adventure/schema.ts

## Low-level tasks

### [T-015] Fix LLM Player Timeout Issues [TODO]
**Dependencies**: T-014
**Description**: Fix the timeout errors that appear during the LLM player demo script execution, even though the AI continues to play the game successfully. The errors appear after each action while the mock LLM is still responding.
**Acceptance Criteria**:
- Identify the cause of timeout errors in the mock LLM implementation
- Fix the race condition between the timeout and response promises
- Ensure no timeout errors appear during normal script execution
- Maintain the proper timeout behavior if the LLM truly doesn't respond
- Update tests to verify the fix works correctly
**Additional Bug Information**:
- After AI completes the game (either win or loss condition), multiple timeout errors (about 20) appear before the game finally exits
- Error pattern: "Timeout of 30000ms exceeded waiting for LLM response" appears repeatedly after game completion
- Appears to be related to improper cleanup or continued LLM calls after game state is marked as finished
**Relevant Files**:
- /Users/maxyankov/Projects/ai-plays-pico8/src/ai/llm-player.ts
- /Users/maxyankov/Projects/ai-plays-pico8/src/ai/llm-player.test.ts

### [T-016] Create Short Demo Game [TESTING]
**Dependencies**: T-005
**Description**: Create a shorter, faster text adventure demo game that can be completed in 10-15 actions. This will serve as a quick introduction to the system for new users, while keeping the current more extensive text adventure as a second option.
**Acceptance Criteria**:
- Create a new compact text adventure game implementation ✅
- Design a game that can be completed in 10-15 actions ✅
- Include basic game mechanics (movement, items, using items) ✅
- Ensure the game has clear win/lose conditions ✅
- Update the play-ai.ts and play-human.ts scripts to support selecting this new game ✅
- Update documentation to mention both game options ✅
**Relevant Files**:
- /Users/maxyankov/Projects/ai-plays-pico8/src/games/text-adventure/compact-adventure.ts
- /Users/maxyankov/Projects/ai-plays-pico8/src/games/text-adventure/index.ts
- /Users/maxyankov/Projects/ai-plays-pico8/src/scripts/play-ai.ts
- /Users/maxyankov/Projects/ai-plays-pico8/src/scripts/play-human.ts

**Manual Testing Instructions**:
1. Test the compact adventure with human player:
   ```
   bun run play:human compact-adventure
   ```
   - The game should start in a cave entrance
   - Verify you can move between rooms, take items, and use them
   - Try to complete the game by either:
     - Finding and taking the treasure in the dark room (need to light torch first)
     - Using the key on the pedestal in the puzzle room
   - Verify the game can be completed in 10-15 actions
   - Confirm win/lose conditions work properly

2. Test the compact adventure with AI player:
   ```
   bun run play:ai compact-adventure
   ```
   - Verify the AI can navigate and interact with the game
   - Monitor if the AI can reason about using the torch to see in the dark room
   - Check if the AI can discover both win conditions

3. Verify both game types are selectable:
   - Test the original adventure: `bun run play:human text-adventure`
   - Test the compact adventure: `bun run play:human compact-adventure` 
   - Confirm that both adventures work properly
   - Test with both human and AI players

### [T-014] Create LLM Player Demo Script [TESTING]
**Dependencies**: T-003, T-005
**Description**: Create a script that allows a human to run and observe an LLM playing the text adventure game, with full visibility into the LLM's internal thought process, function calls, and game state transitions.
**Acceptance Criteria**:
- Create a script in src/scripts/play-ai.ts similar to play-human.ts ✅
- Update LLMPlayer implementation with event-based system ✅
- Implement event handlers to expose chat history and responses ✅
- Display both LLM thinking process and final actions in console ✅
- Format console output for readability (colors, sections, etc.) ✅
- Add retry/timeout configuration options via command line args ✅
- Create a bun script command in package.json ✅
- Provide usage instructions in console output ✅
**Relevant Files**:
- /Users/maxyankov/Projects/ai-plays-pico8/src/scripts/play-ai.ts
- /Users/maxyankov/Projects/ai-plays-pico8/src/ai/llm-player.ts
- /Users/maxyankov/Projects/ai-plays-pico8/package.json
- /Users/maxyankov/Projects/ai-plays-pico8/src/games/text-adventure/index.ts

### [T-006] Setup Core Directory Structure [IN PROGRESS]
**Dependencies**: None
**Description**: Create the initial directory structure for the project based on architecture requirements.
**Acceptance Criteria**:
- Create src/ directory with appropriate subdirectories
- Set up structure for core components, schema, games, etc.
- Ensure proper separation of concerns
**Relevant Files**:
- /Users/maxyankov/Projects/ai-plays-pico8/src/
- /Users/maxyankov/Projects/ai-plays-pico8/src/types/
- /Users/maxyankov/Projects/ai-plays-pico8/src/schema/
- /Users/maxyankov/Projects/ai-plays-pico8/src/ai/
- /Users/maxyankov/Projects/ai-plays-pico8/src/launcher/
- /Users/maxyankov/Projects/ai-plays-pico8/src/games/
- /Users/maxyankov/Projects/ai-plays-pico8/src/utils/
- /Users/maxyankov/Projects/ai-plays-pico8/src/config/

### [T-007] Add Zod Schema Library [IN PROGRESS]
**Dependencies**: T-006
**Description**: Add Zod (or similar) schema validation library and set up core schema types.
**Acceptance Criteria**:
- Install Zod package ✅
- Create basic schema utility functions ✅
- Set up schema type definitions ✅
- Add example schema implementation ✅
**Relevant Files**:
- /Users/maxyankov/Projects/ai-plays-pico8/package.json
- /Users/maxyankov/Projects/ai-plays-pico8/src/schema/index.ts
- /Users/maxyankov/Projects/ai-plays-pico8/src/schema/utils.ts
- /Users/maxyankov/Projects/ai-plays-pico8/src/schema/examples.ts
- /Users/maxyankov/Projects/ai-plays-pico8/src/schema/test.ts

### [T-008] Define Core Game Interface [DONE]
**Dependencies**: T-006
**Description**: Define the core Game interface that all game templates will implement.
**Acceptance Criteria**:
- Create Game interface with required methods ✅
- Document proper implementation requirements ✅
- Add type definitions for game state and results ✅
**Relevant Files**:
- /Users/maxyankov/Projects/ai-plays-pico8/src/types/game.ts
- /Users/maxyankov/Projects/ai-plays-pico8/src/types/index.ts

### [T-009] Update README with Project Information [TODO]
**Dependencies**: T-006
**Description**: Update the README with project overview, setup instructions, and usage examples.
**Acceptance Criteria**:
- Add project description matching new architecture
- Include setup and installation instructions
- Add usage examples for playing text games
- Document available commands and options
**Relevant Files**:
- /Users/maxyankov/Projects/ai-plays-pico8/README.md

### [T-010] Implement Human Player Interface [TESTING]
**Dependencies**: T-005
**Description**: Create a generic human player interface for playing games in the terminal, allowing users to test any game directly without AI assistance. The interface should be game-agnostic and not require any game-specific code or subclassing.
**Acceptance Criteria**:
- Command-line interface for human input ✅
- Display game output in terminal ✅
- Generic input handling system that can be adapted to different game schemas ✅
- Proper help text and command suggestions ✅
- Interface that respects the Game interface contract ✅
- Game-agnostic design that doesn't require game-specific implementations ✅
- Ability to run any game with the human player interface ✅
**Relevant Files**:
- /Users/maxyankov/Projects/ai-plays-pico8/src/cli/human-player.ts
- /Users/maxyankov/Projects/ai-plays-pico8/src/cli/terminal-ui.ts
- /Users/maxyankov/Projects/ai-plays-pico8/src/scripts/play-human.ts
- /Users/maxyankov/Projects/ai-plays-pico8/package.json

### [T-011] [URGENT] Fix Action Schema System [TESTING]
**Dependencies**: T-002, T-007
**Description**: The current action schema system needs to be reworked. It should be a map of action names to action schemas, rather than a single schema. This will allow for better type safety and more flexible action handling.
**Acceptance Criteria**:
- Refactor schema system to use a map of action names to schemas ✅
- Update type definitions to ensure type safety across the system ✅
- Ensure schema system generates correct JSON schema for function calling ✅
- Update existing game implementations to use the new schema system ✅
- Add proper typings to infer action types from schema definitions ✅
**Relevant Files**:
- /Users/maxyankov/Projects/ai-plays-pico8/src/schema/utils.ts
- /Users/maxyankov/Projects/ai-plays-pico8/src/schema/index.ts
- /Users/maxyankov/Projects/ai-plays-pico8/src/games/text-adventure/schema.ts
- /Users/maxyankov/Projects/ai-plays-pico8/src/types/game.ts

### [T-012] Enhance Text Adventure With Action Feedback [TESTING]
**Dependencies**: T-005, T-010
**Description**: Enhance the text adventure demo game to provide clear feedback after each action. Currently, the game shows the current state but doesn't provide explicit feedback about the result of the last action taken.
**Acceptance Criteria**:
- Modify the text adventure game to store the result of the last action ✅
- Update the game output to include a section describing what happened ✅
- Provide clear feedback for successful and failed actions ✅
- Ensure feedback is contextual and relevant to the specific action taken ✅
- Test the implementation with the human player interface ✅
**Relevant Files**:
- /Users/maxyankov/Projects/ai-plays-pico8/src/games/text-adventure/index.ts
- /Users/maxyankov/Projects/ai-plays-pico8/src/games/text-adventure/types.ts
- /Users/maxyankov/Projects/ai-plays-pico8/src/games/text-adventure/compact-adventure.ts

**Manual Testing Instructions**:
1. Test the action feedback in the original text adventure:
   ```
   bun run play:human text-adventure
   ```
   - Verify that each action shows a feedback message in the [Last action] section
   - Try different actions: move, look, examine, take, use, inventory, help
   - Check that error messages are shown when actions fail
   - Verify that winning/losing shows appropriate messages

2. Test the action feedback in the compact adventure:
   ```
   bun run play:human compact-adventure
   ```
   - Verify the same feedback functionality works in the compact adventure
   - Try special interactions like using the torch and key
   - Check dark room behavior with/without lit torch

### [T-013] Create Terminal UI Interface and Test Human Player [DONE]
**Dependencies**: T-010
**Description**: Extract an interface from the TerminalUI class and create unit tests for the HumanPlayer functionality with a mock UI implementation. This will improve testability and ensure the human player interface works correctly with any UI implementation.
**Acceptance Criteria**:
- Extract an ITerminalUI interface from the current TerminalUI class ✅
- Update TerminalUI to implement the new interface ✅
- Create a MockTerminalUI class that implements the interface for testing ✅
- Write unit tests for HumanPlayer that use the mock UI to simulate a play session ✅
- Tests should cover all major functionality: command parsing, help display, action execution ✅
- Include tests for both valid and invalid inputs ✅
- Simulate a complete game session with predetermined inputs and verify correct actions ✅
**Relevant Files**:
- /Users/maxyankov/Projects/ai-plays-pico8/src/cli/terminal-ui.ts
- /Users/maxyankov/Projects/ai-plays-pico8/src/cli/human-player.ts
- /Users/maxyankov/Projects/ai-plays-pico8/src/cli/i-terminal-ui.ts
- /Users/maxyankov/Projects/ai-plays-pico8/src/cli/mock-terminal-ui.ts
- /Users/maxyankov/Projects/ai-plays-pico8/src/cli/human-player.test.ts

Commit message:

refactor(ai): replace mock LLM Player with placeholder pending proper AI package integration
* Removed mock LLM implementation which had timeout issues
* Created placeholder LLM Player that throws 'not implemented' error
* Updated task T-015 to focus on proper AI package integration
* Removed tests that are no longer relevant

docs/TASKS.md, after:

# Tasks

## Current Task ID Counter: T-016

This counter tracks the highest task ID used so far. When creating a new task, use T-017 as the next available ID.

## Current Priorities
1. [T-015] Fix LLM Player Timeout Issues
2. [T-016] Create Short Demo Game
3. [T-001] Setup Project Structure
4. [T-002] Implement Core Schema System
5. [T-003] Create AI Player Interface
6. [T-014] Create LLM Player Demo Script
7. [T-004] Build Game Launcher

## IMPORTANT: INSTRUCTIONS FOR WORKING WITH THIS DOCUMENT

These instructions must not be summarized or removed from this document.

**Testing Requirements**: For general testing guidelines and approach, refer to [TESTING.md](TESTING.md). Each task requiring testing should include specific test procedures directly in its description.

1. **Task Structure**:
   - Each task has a unique ID (format: T-XXX)
   - Use the Task ID Counter at the top of this document to determine the next available ID
   - Increment the counter each time you create a new task
   - Tasks can have dependencies (list of task IDs)
   - Tasks must have clear acceptance criteria
   - Tasks can be high-level (epics) or low-level (implementation details)

2. **Task States** (standard sequence):
   - TODO: Not started
   - BLOCKED: Cannot proceed due to dependencies
   - IN PROGRESS: Currently being worked on
   - TESTING: Implementation complete, awaiting human verification
   - DONE: Completed and verified (all tests passing and human verified)
   - CANCELLED: Will not be implemented, with reason
   
   **Important State Transition Rules:**
   - A task should ONLY move from TESTING to DONE when ALL tests pass
   - If any tests fail during the TESTING phase, the task MUST be moved back to IN PROGRESS state
   - Human verification is required for all state transitions from TESTING to DONE
   - When "manual testing" is mentioned, it ALWAYS means asking the human user to test the functionality - AI cannot perform manual testing itself

3. **Task Maintenance**:
   - When a task is marked as DONE and has been verified, it should LATER be moved to TASK_ARCHIVE.md
   - Use the archive script to move completed tasks: `./scripts/archive_task.sh T-XXX`
   - NEVER use the Edit tool directly on the TASK_ARCHIVE.md file
   - The archive script will automatically extract, append, and remove the task
   - Links in tasks may refer to archived tasks - use GrepTool to find them in TASK_ARCHIVE.md
   - Break down high-level tasks into low-level tasks as work progresses
   - Do not remove these instructions
   - Reflect on different tasks and make sure that this document doesn't have self-contradictions

4. **Task Format**:
```
### [T-XXX] Short descriptive title [STATE]
**Dependencies**: T-YYY, T-ZZZ (if any)
**Description**: Detailed description of what needs to be done
**Acceptance Criteria**:
- Criterion 1
- Criterion 2
- ...
**Relevant Files**:
- Path to relevant file 1
- Path to relevant file 2
```

5. **Task References**:
   - Each task should include a list of relevant files for implementation
   - This helps with efficient code navigation and understanding
   - Include both existing files that need to be referenced and new files to be created
   - The references should be full file paths where possible
   - When referencing directories, use trailing slash to indicate a directory

6. **Task scope**:
   - High-level tasks (Epics) are larger features or user stories
   - Low-level tasks are specific implementation details or sub-tasks
   - Leaf-level (in terms of trees) tasks should be something that can be implemented in a single session

7. **Critical Rules for Task Management**:
   - ALWAYS use this file (TASKS.md) as the SINGLE SOURCE OF TRUTH for ALL work
   - ALL bugs, issues, features, and work items MUST be tracked here
   - NEVER create separate files like ISSUES.md, BUGS.md, etc.
   - When finding bugs or issues, add them directly here as new tasks
   - Mark critical bugs and urgent fixes with [URGENT] tag
   - If a task is becoming too large or complex, break it down into smaller sub-tasks
   - Each task should be focused on a specific problem or feature
   - Create clear parent-child task relationships using dependencies
   - Completed tasks should eventually be moved to TASK_ARCHIVE.md for organizational clarity

## High-level tasks (epics)

### [T-001] Setup Project Structure [IN PROGRESS]
**Dependencies**: None
**Description**: Set up the basic project structure with all necessary configs based on the architecture document.
**Acceptance Criteria**:
- Directory structure defined and created
- All necessary configs in place
- Build pipeline working
- README updated with setup instructions
**Relevant Files**:
- /Users/maxyankov/Projects/ai-plays-pico8/docs/ARCHITECTURE.md
- /Users/maxyankov/Projects/ai-plays-pico8/tsconfig.json
- /Users/maxyankov/Projects/ai-plays-pico8/package.json
- /Users/maxyankov/Projects/ai-plays-pico8/README.md
- /Users/maxyankov/Projects/ai-plays-pico8/src/

### [T-002] Implement Core Schema System [TODO]
**Dependencies**: T-001
**Description**: Create a schema system using Zod or similar library to define and validate game actions, with ability to generate JSON schema for LLM function calling.
**Acceptance Criteria**:
- Schema system implemented with type safety
- Ability to define complex action schemas
- Conversion to JSON Schema for function calling
- Validation/parsing of responses against schemas
- Basic tests demonstrating functionality
**Relevant Files**:
- /Users/maxyankov/Projects/ai-plays-pico8/src/schema/

### [T-003] Create AI Player Interface [TESTING]
**Dependencies**: T-002
**Description**: Implement the core AI Player class that handles LLM interaction, maintains conversation history, and processes game outputs. Use a generic LLM interface for flexibility.
**Acceptance Criteria**:
- AIPlayer class implementation ✅
- Methods for processing game output ✅
- Conversation history management ✅
- LLM integration with function calling ✅
- Configuration options for different LLMs ✅
- Error handling and retry mechanisms ✅
**Relevant Files**:
- /Users/maxyankov/Projects/ai-plays-pico8/src/ai/llm-player.ts
- /Users/maxyankov/Projects/ai-plays-pico8/src/ai/llm-player.test.ts
- /Users/maxyankov/Projects/ai-plays-pico8/src/ai/index.ts
- /Users/maxyankov/Projects/ai-plays-pico8/src/types/game.ts

### [T-004] Build Game Launcher [TODO]
**Dependencies**: T-003
**Description**: Create the main executable launcher that can run games with AI assistance.
**Acceptance Criteria**:
- Command-line interface for launcher
- Ability to select and launch games
- Configuration options for AI and games
- Game lifecycle management
- Results reporting and logging
**Relevant Files**:
- /Users/maxyankov/Projects/ai-plays-pico8/src/launcher/
- /Users/maxyankov/Projects/ai-plays-pico8/index.ts

### [T-005] Implement Sample Text Adventure [IN PROGRESS]
**Dependencies**: T-004
**Description**: Create a simple text adventure game as a first template to demonstrate the system.
**Acceptance Criteria**:
- Basic text adventure implementation ✅
- Multiple rooms/locations ✅
- Items and inventory system ✅
- Simple puzzles for AI to solve ✅
- Clear win/lose conditions ✅
**Relevant Files**:
- /Users/maxyankov/Projects/ai-plays-pico8/src/games/text-adventure/index.ts
- /Users/maxyankov/Projects/ai-plays-pico8/src/games/text-adventure/types.ts
- /Users/maxyankov/Projects/ai-plays-pico8/src/games/text-adventure/schema.ts

## Low-level tasks

### [T-015] Implement LLM Player with proper AI package [BLOCKED]
**Dependencies**: T-014
**Description**: The current LLM Player implementation is incomplete and uses a mock LLM for development. We need a proper implementation using a real AI package. The mock implementation had timeout errors that appear during the LLM player demo script execution, which need to be addressed in the real implementation.
**Acceptance Criteria**:
- Properly integrate a real AI package (like Vercel's `ai`)
- Implement the getAction method to use the AI package's chat API
- Ensure conversation history is maintained correctly
- Provide proper error handling and retry mechanisms
- Ensure cleanup properly releases all resources
- Add proper documentation in JSDoc comments
**Additional Information**:
- Will need to coordinate with project owner on the AI package strategy and selection
- Need to determine if we'll use hosted models or local models
- Requires proper understanding of the selected AI package's API
**Relevant Files**:
- /Users/maxyankov/Projects/ai-plays-pico8/src/ai/llm-player.ts

### [T-016] Create Short Demo Game [TESTING]
**Dependencies**: T-005
**Description**: Create a shorter, faster text adventure demo game that can be completed in 10-15 actions. This will serve as a quick introduction to the system for new users, while keeping the current more extensive text adventure as a second option.
**Acceptance Criteria**:
- Create a new compact text adventure game implementation ✅
- Design a game that can be completed in 10-15 actions ✅
- Include basic game mechanics (movement, items, using items) ✅
- Ensure the game has clear win/lose conditions ✅
- Update the play-ai.ts and play-human.ts scripts to support selecting this new game ✅
- Update documentation to mention both game options ✅
**Relevant Files**:
- /Users/maxyankov/Projects/ai-plays-pico8/src/games/text-adventure/compact-adventure.ts
- /Users/maxyankov/Projects/ai-plays-pico8/src/games/text-adventure/index.ts
- /Users/maxyankov/Projects/ai-plays-pico8/src/scripts/play-ai.ts
- /Users/maxyankov/Projects/ai-plays-pico8/src/scripts/play-human.ts

**Manual Testing Instructions**:
1. Test the compact adventure with human player:
   ```
   bun run play:human compact-adventure
   ```
   - The game should start in a cave entrance
   - Verify you can move between rooms, take items, and use them
   - Try to complete the game by either:
     - Finding and taking the treasure in the dark room (need to light torch first)
     - Using the key on the pedestal in the puzzle room
   - Verify the game can be completed in 10-15 actions
   - Confirm win/lose conditions work properly

2. Test the compact adventure with AI player:
   ```
   bun run play:ai compact-adventure
   ```
   - Verify the AI can navigate and interact with the game
   - Monitor if the AI can reason about using the torch to see in the dark room
   - Check if the AI can discover both win conditions

3. Verify both game types are selectable:
   - Test the original adventure: `bun run play:human text-adventure`
   - Test the compact adventure: `bun run play:human compact-adventure` 
   - Confirm that both adventures work properly
   - Test with both human and AI players

### [T-014] Create LLM Player Demo Script [TESTING]
**Dependencies**: T-003, T-005
**Description**: Create a script that allows a human to run and observe an LLM playing the text adventure game, with full visibility into the LLM's internal thought process, function calls, and game state transitions.
**Acceptance Criteria**:
- Create a script in src/scripts/play-ai.ts similar to play-human.ts ✅
- Update LLMPlayer implementation with event-based system ✅
- Implement event handlers to expose chat history and responses ✅
- Display both LLM thinking process and final actions in console ✅
- Format console output for readability (colors, sections, etc.) ✅
- Add retry/timeout configuration options via command line args ✅
- Create a bun script command in package.json ✅
- Provide usage instructions in console output ✅
**Relevant Files**:
- /Users/maxyankov/Projects/ai-plays-pico8/src/scripts/play-ai.ts
- /Users/maxyankov/Projects/ai-plays-pico8/src/ai/llm-player.ts
- /Users/maxyankov/Projects/ai-plays-pico8/package.json
- /Users/maxyankov/Projects/ai-plays-pico8/src/games/text-adventure/index.ts

### [T-006] Setup Core Directory Structure [IN PROGRESS]
**Dependencies**: None
**Description**: Create the initial directory structure for the project based on architecture requirements.
**Acceptance Criteria**:
- Create src/ directory with appropriate subdirectories
- Set up structure for core components, schema, games, etc.
- Ensure proper separation of concerns
**Relevant Files**:
- /Users/maxyankov/Projects/ai-plays-pico8/src/
- /Users/maxyankov/Projects/ai-plays-pico8/src/types/
- /Users/maxyankov/Projects/ai-plays-pico8/src/schema/
- /Users/maxyankov/Projects/ai-plays-pico8/src/ai/
- /Users/maxyankov/Projects/ai-plays-pico8/src/launcher/
- /Users/maxyankov/Projects/ai-plays-pico8/src/games/
- /Users/maxyankov/Projects/ai-plays-pico8/src/utils/
- /Users/maxyankov/Projects/ai-plays-pico8/src/config/

### [T-007] Add Zod Schema Library [IN PROGRESS]
**Dependencies**: T-006
**Description**: Add Zod (or similar) schema validation library and set up core schema types.
**Acceptance Criteria**:
- Install Zod package ✅
- Create basic schema utility functions ✅
- Set up schema type definitions ✅
- Add example schema implementation ✅
**Relevant Files**:
- /Users/maxyankov/Projects/ai-plays-pico8/package.json
- /Users/maxyankov/Projects/ai-plays-pico8/src/schema/index.ts
- /Users/maxyankov/Projects/ai-plays-pico8/src/schema/utils.ts
- /Users/maxyankov/Projects/ai-plays-pico8/src/schema/examples.ts
- /Users/maxyankov/Projects/ai-plays-pico8/src/schema/test.ts

### [T-008] Define Core Game Interface [DONE]
**Dependencies**: T-006
**Description**: Define the core Game interface that all game templates will implement.
**Acceptance Criteria**:
- Create Game interface with required methods ✅
- Document proper implementation requirements ✅
- Add type definitions for game state and results ✅
**Relevant Files**:
- /Users/maxyankov/Projects/ai-plays-pico8/src/types/game.ts
- /Users/maxyankov/Projects/ai-plays-pico8/src/types/index.ts

### [T-009] Update README with Project Information [TODO]
**Dependencies**: T-006
**Description**: Update the README with project overview, setup instructions, and usage examples.
**Acceptance Criteria**:
- Add project description matching new architecture
- Include setup and installation instructions
- Add usage examples for playing text games
- Document available commands and options
**Relevant Files**:
- /Users/maxyankov/Projects/ai-plays-pico8/README.md

### [T-010] Implement Human Player Interface [TESTING]
**Dependencies**: T-005
**Description**: Create a generic human player interface for playing games in the terminal, allowing users to test any game directly without AI assistance. The interface should be game-agnostic and not require any game-specific code or subclassing.
**Acceptance Criteria**:
- Command-line interface for human input ✅
- Display game output in terminal ✅
- Generic input handling system that can be adapted to different game schemas ✅
- Proper help text and command suggestions ✅
- Interface that respects the Game interface contract ✅
- Game-agnostic design that doesn't require game-specific implementations ✅
- Ability to run any game with the human player interface ✅
**Relevant Files**:
- /Users/maxyankov/Projects/ai-plays-pico8/src/cli/human-player.ts
- /Users/maxyankov/Projects/ai-plays-pico8/src/cli/terminal-ui.ts
- /Users/maxyankov/Projects/ai-plays-pico8/src/scripts/play-human.ts
- /Users/maxyankov/Projects/ai-plays-pico8/package.json

### [T-011] [URGENT] Fix Action Schema System [TESTING]
**Dependencies**: T-002, T-007
**Description**: The current action schema system needs to be reworked. It should be a map of action names to action schemas, rather than a single schema. This will allow for better type safety and more flexible action handling.
**Acceptance Criteria**:
- Refactor schema system to use a map of action names to schemas ✅
- Update type definitions to ensure type safety across the system ✅
- Ensure schema system generates correct JSON schema for function calling ✅
- Update existing game implementations to use the new schema system ✅
- Add proper typings to infer action types from schema definitions ✅
**Relevant Files**:
- /Users/maxyankov/Projects/ai-plays-pico8/src/schema/utils.ts
- /Users/maxyankov/Projects/ai-plays-pico8/src/schema/index.ts
- /Users/maxyankov/Projects/ai-plays-pico8/src/games/text-adventure/schema.ts
- /Users/maxyankov/Projects/ai-plays-pico8/src/types/game.ts

### [T-012] Enhance Text Adventure With Action Feedback [TESTING]
**Dependencies**: T-005, T-010
**Description**: Enhance the text adventure demo game to provide clear feedback after each action. Currently, the game shows the current state but doesn't provide explicit feedback about the result of the last action taken.
**Acceptance Criteria**:
- Modify the text adventure game to store the result of the last action ✅
- Update the game output to include a section describing what happened ✅
- Provide clear feedback for successful and failed actions ✅
- Ensure feedback is contextual and relevant to the specific action taken ✅
- Test the implementation with the human player interface ✅
**Relevant Files**:
- /Users/maxyankov/Projects/ai-plays-pico8/src/games/text-adventure/index.ts
- /Users/maxyankov/Projects/ai-plays-pico8/src/games/text-adventure/types.ts
- /Users/maxyankov/Projects/ai-plays-pico8/src/games/text-adventure/compact-adventure.ts

**Manual Testing Instructions**:
1. Test the action feedback in the original text adventure:
   ```
   bun run play:human text-adventure
   ```
   - Verify that each action shows a feedback message in the [Last action] section
   - Try different actions: move, look, examine, take, use, inventory, help
   - Check that error messages are shown when actions fail
   - Verify that winning/losing shows appropriate messages

2. Test the action feedback in the compact adventure:
   ```
   bun run play:human compact-adventure
   ```
   - Verify the same feedback functionality works in the compact adventure
   - Try special interactions like using the torch and key
   - Check dark room behavior with/without lit torch

### [T-013] Create Terminal UI Interface and Test Human Player [DONE]
**Dependencies**: T-010
**Description**: Extract an interface from the TerminalUI class and create unit tests for the HumanPlayer functionality with a mock UI implementation. This will improve testability and ensure the human player interface works correctly with any UI implementation.
**Acceptance Criteria**:
- Extract an ITerminalUI interface from the current TerminalUI class ✅
- Update TerminalUI to implement the new interface ✅
- Create a MockTerminalUI class that implements the interface for testing ✅
- Write unit tests for HumanPlayer that use the mock UI to simulate a play session ✅
- Tests should cover all major functionality: command parsing, help display, action execution ✅
- Include tests for both valid and invalid inputs ✅
- Simulate a complete game session with predetermined inputs and verify correct actions ✅
**Relevant Files**:
- /Users/maxyankov/Projects/ai-plays-pico8/src/cli/terminal-ui.ts
- /Users/maxyankov/Projects/ai-plays-pico8/src/cli/human-player.ts
- /Users/maxyankov/Projects/ai-plays-pico8/src/cli/i-terminal-ui.ts
- /Users/maxyankov/Projects/ai-plays-pico8/src/cli/mock-terminal-ui.ts
- /Users/maxyankov/Projects/ai-plays-pico8/src/cli/human-player.test.ts
